Okay.
So we talked a little about the impact of
excluding important aggressors right,
that results and bias.
And now let's deep down a little bit
further in this other phenomenon, that if
we include an important aggressors,
that causes so called variance inflation.
So I'm going to show this
with a little simulation.
Okay, so in this case I have
a sample of size 100, and
I'm going to do 1,000 simulations,
so let me define those.
Get some space down here, so we're just
looking at this new set of code, okay.
So I'm going to define those, and then
we're going to define three regressors,
they're all just three independent
random normal vectors.
And then what I'm going to
do is simulate data,
where the outcome y only depends on x1.
An error, and then doesn't depend
on the other two variables.
And then I'm going to look at the standard
error for the x1 variable for
the model that just includes x1,
that's this one.
The model that includes x1 and
x2, that's this one, and
the model that includes x1 and x3.
And I'm going to do that over and
over again.
And I'm going to look at the standard
deviation of the simulated estimated
coefficients.
Now the reason I'm doing this by
simulation, is because the variance
inflation occurs on the actual standard
errors, not the estimated standard errors.
It's actually a little complicated,
in that if I put another variable into
a regression model, it doesn't necessarily
inflate the observed standard error.
And the reason is because the variance is
estimated rather than the actual variance.
And that has a kind of
conflicting property.
So you don't necessarily see the variance
go up when you include
a regressor in an regression,
an unnecessary regressor
into a regression model.
You have to look at it through simulation.
Let's go ahead and do this.
This is sort of the ideal setting,
where the three regressors don't have
anything to do with one another.
Now what you see is in fact.
So the first model this is the standard
error, the standard deviation
of the beta coefficients I got
crossed across all simulations.
Here's the second one.
It actually went down a little
bit with the second one.
Now we know theoretically
that can't happen.
But there is some Monte Carlo
error when I do my simulation.
So let;'s just say,
these two are about the same.
And, the third one is also about the same,
0.032 as opposed to 0.031.
So nothing that bad.
The variance inflation by including
the extra variables did almost,
was negligible.
And the reason that is the case, is
because these other to variables, x2 and
x3, have nothing to do x1.
I simulated them independently.
Let's look at a case now,
where I've simulated them in such
a way that they depend heavily on x1.
So I'm going to generate my
x1 as I did the last time,
just as a random normal vector.
But my x2 depends on x1,
but also some noise.
And my x3 is heavily dependent on x1,
very dependent on x1, okay?
So now, let's repeat the simulation.
And see what happens to the variability
and the estimated coefficients.
Okay, now we see huge amounts of
variance inflation, especially for
this third model where we include x2 and
x3, right.
We see the standard air has gone
up by a factor of five, okay.
And that goes to the general rule,
If the variable that you
include is highly correlated to the thing
that you're interested in, right?
You are going to inflate
the variance more.
And so,
you need to concern yourself with putting
highly correlated variables into your
regression model, unnecessarily, okay?
So if I have diastolic blood
pressure in my model, and
I put systolic blood pressure on my model,
which is basically the same,
relatively the same thing,
they're very correlated.
If I did that unnecessarily, that's going
to make my diastolic blood pressure,
standard air, it's going to increase it.
So yeah, imagine for
example another example is if you
had height in a model and then you also
included weight or something like that.
Something that's highly related.
Height and weight tend to track
pretty well with one another.
And so if that was necessary to include,
then you just have to bite the bullet and
deal with the extra standard deviation,
the extra standard error that you get.
However, if it's unnecessary,
then you don't want to include it.
So again, the main point is, is the more
correlated the covariants are to
the regressors that you're interested in,
the worse off you're going to be in terms
of paying a penalty for
increased standard deviation.
So that goes to show
there's no free launch.
If we omit variables that are important,
we get bias.
If we include variables that are
unnecessary, we inflate standard errors.
Especially if we include variables that
are unnecessary that are uncorrelated
with our variable of interest.
And this again reiterates why
randomization is so important, right.
So it randomizes across these
other variables, the known and
unknown knowns that we would otherwise
need to include in the model,
so that we can only include
the treatment of fact of interest.
And things that we include even if,
if we feel like we have to,
they should be relatively balanced, or
relatively uncorrelated with the treatment
affect because it's been randomized.
And so we won't get this kind of variance
inflation that we would get otherwise.
So again, that's why randomization
is such an important quality.
Now lets talk about
variance inflation factors.
So we don't know the actual sigma, so
when we include, so we can't actually
calculate the exact variance inflation.
That depends on the actual
true residual variance.
However, if we can compare ratios of them,
the sigma will dropout and
then we can create things like ratios and
variance inflation that
accurately represent how much the standard
deviation is inflated or not.
So, there's a particular measure that is
very commonly used in regression, called
the variance inflation factor or VIF.
And all this is,
is the comparison, this ratio,
the variance inflation that occurs
from what you actually have.
So looking at the standard error for
the data that you have, versus the ideal
setting where all the other covariates
that you're interested in are orthogonal.
To the covariant or
let's just say uncorrelated.
So remember,
that was the ideal case, right?
So if everything else was uncorrelated
to what you were interested in
we didn't see much variance inflation.
This looks at the case that you're in,
versus the ideal case
where what you're interested in is
uncorrelated with all the other variables.
That's the so
called variance inflation factor.
And here I give a little simulation.
I'm not going to show it.
Where I just show you that
the ratios can get estimated, and
I show you a little simulation.
That they can get estimated pretty
well so, let's actually look
with this Swiss data,
let's look at the variance inflation you,
so what I'm going to do is fit
the model What happens if there's some
residual effect of the first aspirin
when you give the second one?
I'm going to fit the model with
all the variables included, so
when you do a ~.,
it includes all the variables.
And then I'm going to do vif(fit), that
gives me my variance inflation factors.
Oh, but, you have to remember to
load this library, c, a, r., okay?
Let's load that, and
then now let's try it again.
I would rather than the variance
inflation factors, I would look at
the inflation factors for the standard
deviations, which is the square root.
So let's look down here.
So on the first line I have the variance
inflation factor by itself and
then in the line below it, I have the
square root of it which I tend to prefer.
So let's look at the first line just
because it's the more normal thing,
the variance inflation, so
for the agriculture 1 is 2.
What does that mean?
It means the standard error for
the agriculture effect is double
of what it would be if it were orthogonal
to all the other regressors, okay?
And we see that some of them are quite
high, examination is quite high,
3.67, so almost 4 times
than the instance when if it were
orthogonal to all the other regressors.
And we know that education,
I'm sorry, examination and
education are highly related, so
that's why these two have very high
variance inflation factors relative
to some of the other ones.
And that, and you can see,
take a variable like infant mortality,
which has a very low
variance inflation factor.
Infant mortality is largely going to be
unrelated to any of these other variables,
by and large, and so you can see that it
doesn't have a large variance inflation
factor because it is pretty much unrelated
to the other variables anyway, okay?
So that's gets you a little bit of
headway into the world of looking at
what happens when you include
unnecessary variables, and
one of the ways to look at that is
so-called variance inflation factors,
and they're incredibly useful little tools
and I hope you get a chance to use them.
So up to this point all that we've talked
about is the impact of unnecessary or
necessary included variables on
our regression coefficients.
But there's one other parameter that
we estimate in a regression model,
the residual variant, sigma squared.
So what happens if we
have assuming iid errors
in our linear model is additive, and
that that part of the model is correct,
then we can mathematically describe the
impact of omitting unnecessary variables
or including unnecessary variables.
And it follows along the same
lines as what we discussed before,
if we underfit the model, in other words,
we omit important variables,
then the variance estimate is biased.
Why is that?
Because we've attributed to variation
things that are actually systematically
explained by these co-variants
that we've omitted.
On the other hand,
if we either correctly fit the model,
we include all the right terms,
or if we overfit the model,
then the variance estimates in
unbiased; however, the variance
of the variance estimate gets inflated
if we include unnecessary variables.
So it's actually kind of the same rule,
if we omit, as we've discussed before with
coefficients, if we omit variables then
we get biased, if we include variables,
then we get a less reliable estimate, so
it's roughly the same impact going on.
So let's talk about model selection in
general, automated model selection.
I'm going to fit the model with
all the variables included, so
when you do a ~.,
it includes all the variables.
It really, I think,
in one point was a statistical topic but
it's really moved in to the realm of
machine learning for the most part.
And I would say, though,
even for relatively simple
linear regression models, the space of
model terms that you have to search among
explodes really quickly when you
start including interactions and
polynomial terms like the square
of a regressor and so on.
If you have a lot of regressors and you're
interested in how do I reduce this space,
then there's a lot of factor analytic and
things like principal components,
those kind of techniques
that are available to you,
to reduce your co-variant
space down to size.
Now however, those come with consequences.
Your principal components or factors that
you obtain might be less interpretable
than the original data that
you're interested in again.
Again, this is probably better
served in a multivariable class,
a multivariate class, or
a class on machine learning.
But for us we're going to mostly consider
the case where we have a relatively
small number of regressors, and we're
going to pick through them with a highly
interactive process between the analysts,
the data, and the scientific context.
Another thing I would mention is that good
design can often eliminate the need for
a lot of this model discussion.
We've talked a lot about how
randomization can really prevent a lot of
the problems that we're
talking about with making our
variable of interest unrelated to nuisance
variables that we're not interested in, or
in nuisance variables that we
don't even know about; however,
there's other aspects of design
that can serve the same purpose.
For example, if we stratify and
randomize within strata.
The classic example of this,
when this was developed, was R.A.
Fisher was working in field crop
experiments and they needed,
let's say you were trying
a different kind of seed,
you might block on different areas of the
field that you were going to plant in and
randomize the different
seeds to those areas.
So you might have two different kinds of
seeds, but they will have been distributed
in a systematic way that is
fair across the field, but
also then, within that design,
there will also be some randomization.
This topic of experimental
design is a pretty broad topic.
Another great example is in biostatistics,
the field that I work in the most,
a very common kind of design
is a cross-over design, and
in that case, you try to use every
subject as their own control.
So let's say, for example,
you're interested at looking at two
different kinds of aspirin, and
you might give the aspirin to one group
of people, and then the aspirin to
another group of people, and the other
aspirin to a different group of people.
Let's say they have different gels or
whatever that determine how much it,
how it gets absorbed in your stomach.
So if those two groups aren't the same,
either the randomization wasn't
very good and there was some certain
imbalance that you just got unlucky about,
or if the study was just observational,
then the comparison of those two groups
might be biased by whatever differentiates
the groups rather than group one receiving
one kind of aspirin and group two
receiving a different kind of aspirin.
On the other hand, if you can give
a person one kind of aspirin and
then later on give them a different
kind of aspirin when they have another
headache, that would compare each
person to themselves, right?
Control block on the person so to speak.
So that's a design strategy.
Now there's some nuance with
this design strategy as well.
What happens if there's some residual
effect of the first aspirin when you
give the second one?
So maybe you could handle that
with some sort of wash out period,
long wash out period or
something like that.
But anyway, the point of that design is to
make it, so that you're comparing people
with themselves to control and
everything that's intrinsic to the person.
These across time periods control for that
by giving both aspects to each person.
Maybe you would randomize the order
in which they received them that's
called a crossword design.
At any rate, the broader point that I'm
trying to make is, it's often the case
that good thoughtful experimental design
can really eliminate the need for
some of the main considerations that
you would have to go through in model
building if you were to just collect
data in an observational fashion.
[SOUND] The last thing I would say is
there's one automated search model
technique that I like quite a bit and
I find it very useful and
it's the idea of looking at nested models.
So, I'm often interested in
a particular variable and I'm very
interested in how the other variables
that I've collected will impact it.
So, I'm interested in a treatment or
something like that.
Some important variable, but
I'm worried that my treatment groups and
imbalanced with respect to potentially
some of these other variables.
So what I'd like to look at is the model
that just includes the treatment by itself
and the model that includes
the treatment and let's say, age.
If the ages weren't really balanced
between the two treatment groups and
then one that looks at age and gender,
if maybe the genders between the two
groups weren't really balanced and
then so on.
And this idea of creating
models that are nested,
every successive model contains all
the terms of the previous model
leads to a very easy way of
testing each successive model.
And these nested model examples
are very easy to do, so I'm just
going to show you some code right here on
how you do nest and model testing in R.
So I fit three linear
models to our SWF dataset,
the first one just includes agriculture.
Let's pretend that, that's the variable
that we're interested in and
then the next one includes agriculture and
examination in education.
I put both of those in,
because I'm thinking they're kind
of measuring the same thing.
But now after this lecture, I'm concerned
over the possibility that they're too
much of measuring the same thing, but
let's put that aside for this time being.
And then the third model includes
Examination + Education + Catholic +
Infant.Mortality.
So, all the terms.
So now, I have three nested models and
I'm interested in seeing what happens to
my effect as I go through
those three models.
The point being, in this case, you can
test whether or not the inclusion of
the additional set of extra terms is
necessary with the ANOVA function.
So I do anova fit1, fit1 and fit5.
That's what I named them,
one, three, five.
And then you see down here,
what you get is a listing of the models.
Model 1, model 2, model 3 and
then it gives you the degrees of freedom.
That's the number of data points minus the
number of parameters that it had to fit.
The residual sums of squares and
the excess degrees of freedom of going
Df is the excess degrees of freedom of
going from model 1 to model 2 and
then model 2 to model 3.
So we added two parameters going from
model 1 to model 2, that's why that Df is
2 and then we added two additional
parameters going from model 2 to model 3.
So the two parameters we added from going
from model 1 to model 2 is we added
examination and education,
they're two regression coefficients.
Going from model 2 to model 3,
we added Catholic and
Infant.Mortality there to
regression coefficients.
With this residual sum to squares and
the degrees of freedom,
you can calculate so-called S statistic.
And thus, get a P value.
This gives you the S statistic and
the P value associated with each of them,
then here it shows that yes, the inclusion
of education examination Information
appears to be necessary when we're
just looking at agriculture by itself.
Then I look at the next one it say,
yes, the inclusion of Catholic and
Infant.Mortality appears
to be necessary beyond just
including examination,
education and agriculture.
So if the way in which you're interested
in looking at your data naturally
falls into a nest model
search as it often does,
I think when you're interested
in one variable in specific.
As in this case,
I think this would be a pretty natural way
of thinking about the series of analyses,
then some kind of nested model
searches a reasonable thing to do.
It doesn't work if the models that
you're looking at aren't nested.
For example, if I had the first model or
model 2 had an examination, but
not education and the third model
had education, but not examination.
This wouldn't apply,
you'd have to do something else.
And there, I think you get into the harder
world of automated model selection with
things like information criteria.
So I would put all that stuff
off to our prediction class and
just leave you this one technique that's
useful in the one specific instance
where you've decided to kind of
look along a series of models,
each get increasingly more uncomplicated,
but including the previous one.
So, I hope in this lecture that you've
gotten a couple of model selection
techniques that you can use.
I hope you've also learned that there are
some basic consequences that occur, if you
include variables that you shouldn't have
or exclude variables that you should have.
These has consequences to your
coefficients that you're interested in,
they have consequences to your
residual variance estimate.
We didn't even touch on some other aspects
of [INAUDIBLE] model that could occur,
such as absence of linearity and other
things like that, non-normality and so on.
So again, it's generally necessary to take
your model that's the a grain of salt,
because more than likely one
aspect of your model is wrong.
And I'll leave you then with this
famous quote by George Box who vary
famously said, all models are wrong,
some models are useful.
And I think that's a very credo
to go along with that yes, for
sure your model is wrong, but
it might be useful in the sense of being
a lens to teach you something useful and
true about your data set.
So that ends today's lecture and I look
forward to seeing you for the next one.